bizjournals.com/chicago/news/2014/07/14/mystery-resolved-united-airlines-reveals-reason.html

Mystery resolved: United Airlines reveals reason for Flight 201 diversion

United Airlines got the attention of the national news media in a big way Saturday as the drama aboard United Flight No. 201 en route from Honolulu, HI. to Guam played out over the Pacific Ocean and on tiny, nearly deserted Midway Island. That is where the United flight on a Boeing 777 aircraft was forced to make an emergency landing land after a mechanical problem arose on the plane in the middle of the Pacific Ocean.

In the early hours after Flight 201 landed safely on Midway Island, Chicago-based United (NYSE: UAL) said little about what had caused passengers to complain of strange odors and smoke in the cabin after the plane had taken off from Honolulu, HI. with 335 passengers and 13 crew members aboard.

Nonetheless, the cause of the problem, as might be expected, was speculated about endlessly on TV newscasts in the immediate wake of the incident, though United would only say in the early going that there was a mechanical matter.

But by Monday morning United had revealed the mysterious cause of the mechanical issue: A problem with the equipment supply cooling fan on board the Boeing 777. A United spokeswoman said this morning that the problem had been corrected.

Though the passengers on the diverted Flight No. 201 flew back to Honolulu on a different plane and then on to Guam, the United spokeswoman said the plane that had experienced the mechanical problem was subsequently flown from Midway Island back to San Francisco, where it was returned to service yesterday.

Though Midway Island is rarely in the news news nowadays, history buffs will recognize it as the site of a United States military outpost during World War II.

Only about 60 people still live on the tiny atoll, according to news reports Saturday. While the stranded United passengers awaited onward transportation, they were accommodated in a gymnasium that had been part of the military base on the Island.